<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2>XXIV</h2>
				<p>Prison-Breaking</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>It was with considerable anxiety that I repaired to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Blakesley’s room. There I found the old lady at the breakfast-table, so thoroughly composed, that I was at once reassured as to her ignorance of what had occurred while she slept. But she seemed uneasy till I should take my departure, which I attributed to the fear that I might happen to meet Lady Alice.</p>
			<p>Arrived at my inn, I kept my room, my dim-seen plans rendering it desirable that I should attract as little attention in the neighbourhood as might be. I had now to concentrate these plans, and make them definite to myself. It was clear that there was no chance of spending another night at Hilton Hall by invitation: would it be honourable to go there without one, as I, knowing all the <i>outs and ins</i> of the place, could, if I pleased? I went over the whole question of Alice’s position in that house, and of the crime committed against her. I saw that, if I could win my wife by restoring to her the exercise of reason, that very success would justify the right I already possessed in her. And could she not demand of me to climb over any walls, or break open whatsoever doors, to free her from her prison⁠—from the darkness of a clouded brain? Let them say what they would of the meanness and wickedness of gaining such access to, and using such power over, the insane⁠—she was mine, and as safe with me as with her mother. There is a love that tears and destroys; and there is a love that enfolds and saves. I hated mesmerism and its vulgar impertinences; but here was a power I possessed, as far as I knew, only over one, and that one allied to me by a reciprocal influence, as well as long-tried affection.⁠—Did not love give me the right to employ this power?</p>
			<p>My cognitions concluded in the resolve to use the means in my hands for the rescue of Lady Alice. Midnight found me in the alley of the kitchen-garden. The door of the little court opened easily. Nor had I withdrawn its bolts without knowing that I could manage to open the window of my old room from the outside. I stood in the dark, a stranger and housebreaker, where so often I had sat waiting the visits of my angel. I secured the door of the room, struck a light, lighted a remnant of taper which I found on the table, threw myself on the couch, and said to my Alice⁠—“Come.”</p>
			<p>And she came. I rose. She laid herself down. I pulled off my coat⁠—it was all I could find⁠—and laid it over her. The night was chilly. She revived with the same sweet smile, but, giving a little shiver, said:</p>
			<p>“Why have you no fire, Duncan? I must give orders about it. That’s some trick of old Clankshoe.”</p>
			<p>“Dear Alice, do not breath a word about me to any one. I have quarrelled with Lord Hilton. He has turned me away, and I have no business to be in the house.”</p>
			<p>“Oh!” she replied, with a kind of faint recollecting hesitation. “That must be why you never come to the haunted chamber now. I go there every night, as soon as the sun is down.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, that is it, Alice.”</p>
			<p>“Ah! that must be what makes the day so strange to me too.”</p>
			<p>She looked very bewildered for a moment, and then resumed:</p>
			<p>“Do you know, Duncan, I feel very strange all day⁠—as if I was walking about in a dull dream that would never come to an end? But it is very different at night⁠—is it not, dear?”</p>
			<p>She had not yet discovered any distinction between my presence to her dreams and my presence to her waking sight. I hardly knew what reply to make; but she went on:</p>
			<p>“They won’t let me come to you now, I suppose. I shall forget my Euclid and everything. I feel as if I had forgotten it all already. But you won’t be vexed with your poor Alice, will you? She’s only a beggar-girl, you know.”</p>
			<p>I could answer only by a caress.</p>
			<p>“I had a strange dream the other night. I thought I was sitting on a stone in the dark. And I heard your voice calling me. And it went all round about me, and came nearer, and went farther off, but I could not move to go to you. I tried to answer you, but I could only make a queer sound, not like my own voice at all.”</p>
			<p>“I dreamed it too, Alice.”</p>
			<p>“The same dream?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, the very same.”</p>
			<p>“I am so glad. But I didn’t like the dream. Duncan, my head feels so strange sometimes. And I am so sleepy. Duncan, dearest⁠—am <i>I</i> dreaming now? Oh! tell me that I am awake and that I hold you; for to-morrow, when I wake, I shall fancy that I have lost you. They’ve spoiled my poor brain, somehow. I am all right, I know, but I cannot get at it. The red is withered, somehow.”</p>
			<p>“You are wide awake, my Alice. I know all about it. I will help you to understand it all, only you must do exactly as I tell you.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes.”</p>
			<p>“Then go to bed now, and sleep as much as you can; else I will not let you come to me at night.”</p>
			<p>“That would be too cruel, when it is all I have.”</p>
			<p>“Then go, dearest, and sleep.”</p>
			<p>“I will.”</p>
			<p>She rose and went. I, too, went, making all close behind me. The moon was going down. Her light looked to me strange, and almost malignant. I feared that when she came to the full she would hurt my darling’s brain, and I longed to climb the sky, and cut her in pieces. Was I too going mad? I needed rest, that was all.</p>
			<p>Next morning, I called again upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Blakesley, to inquire after Lady Alice, anxious to know how yesterday had passed.</p>
			<p>“Just the same,” answered the old lady. “You need not look for any change. Yesterday I did see her smile once, though.”</p>
			<p>And was that nothing?</p>
			<p>In her case there was a reversal of the usual facts of nature⁠—(<i>I say facts</i>, not <i>laws</i>): the dreams of most people are more or less insane; those of Lady Alice were sound; thus, with her, restoring the balance of sane life. That smile was the sign of the dream-life beginning to leaven the waking and false life.</p>
			<p>“Have you heard of young Lord Hilton’s marriage?” asked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Blakesley.</p>
			<p>“I have only heard some rumours about it,” I answered. “Who is the new countess?”</p>
			<p>“The daughter of a rich merchant somewhere. They say she isn’t the best of tempers. They’re coming here in about a month. I am just terrified to think how it may fare with my lamb now. They won’t let her go wandering about wherever she pleases, I doubt. And if they shut her up, she will die.”</p>
			<p>I vowed inwardly that she should be free, if I carried her off, madness and all.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
